README.md, before:

# Wagtail/Airtable

An extension for Wagtail allowing content to be transferred between Airtable sheets and your Wagtail/Django models.

Developed by [Torchbox](https://torchbox.com/) and sponsored by [The Motley Fool](https://www.fool.com/).

![Wagtail Airtable demo](examples/preview.gif)

### How it works

When you setup a model to "map" to an Airtable sheet, every time you save the model it will attempt to update the row in Airtable. If a row is not found, it will create a new row in your Airtable.

When you want to sync your Airtable data to your Wagtail website, you can go to `Settings -> Airtable Import`. You can then import entire tables into your Wagtail instance with the click of a button. If you see "_{Your Model}_ is not setup with the correct Airtable settings" you will need to double check your settings. By default the import page can be found at http://yourwebsite.com/admin/airtable-import/, or if you use a custom /admin/ url it'll be http://yourwebsite.com/{custom_admin_url}/airtable-import/.

##### Behind the scenes...
This package will attempt to match a model object against row in Airtable using a `record_id`. If a model does not have a record_id value, it will look for a match using the `AIRTABLE_UNIQUE_IDENTIFIER` to try and match a unique value in the Airtable to the unique value in your model. Should that succeed your model object will be "paired" with the row in Airtable. But should the record-search fail, a new row in Airtable will be created when you save your model, or a new model object will attempt to be created when you import a model from Airtable.

> **Note**: Object creation _can_ fail when importing from Airtable. This is expected behaviour as an Airtable might not have all the data a model requires. For instance, a Wagtail Page uses django-treebeard, with path as a required field. If the page model import settings do not include the path field, or a path column isn't present in Airtable, the page cannot be created. This same rule applies to other required fields on any Django model including other required fields on a Wagtail Page.

### Installation & Configuration

* Install the package with `pip install wagtail-airtable`
* Add `'wagtail_airtable'` to your project's `INSTALLED_APPS`
* In your settings you will need to map models to Airtable settings. Every model you want to map to an Airtable sheet will need:
    * An `AIRTABLE_BASE_KEY`. You can find the base key in your Airtable docs when you're signed in to Airtable.com
    * An `AIRTABLE_TABLE_NAME` to determine which table to connect to.
    * An `AIRTABLE_UNIQUE_IDENTIFIER`. This can either be a string or a dictionary mapping the Airtable column name to your unique field in your model.
        * ie. `AIRTABLE_UNIQUE_IDENTIFIER: 'slug',` this will match the `slug` field on your model with the `slug` column name in Airtable. Use this option if your model field and your Airtable column name are identical.
        * ie. `AIRTABLE_UNIQUE_IDENTIFIER: {'Airtable Column Name': 'model_field_name'},` this will map the `Airtable Column Name` to a model field called `model_field_name`. Use this option if your Airtable column name and your model field name are different.
    * An `AIRTABLE_SERIALIZER` that takes a string path to your serializer. This helps map incoming data from Airtable to your model fields. Django Rest Framework is required for this. See the [examples/](examples/) directory for serializer examples.

* Lastly make sure you enable wagtail-airtable with `WAGTAIL_AIRTABLE_ENABLED = True`. By default this is disabled so data in your Wagtail site and your Airtable sheets aren't accidentally overwritten. Data is hard to recover, this option helps prevent accidental data loss.

### Example Base Configuration

Below is a base configuration or `ModelName` and `OtherModelName` (both are registered Wagtail snippets), along with `HomePage`.

```python
# your settings.py
AIRTABLE_API_KEY = 'yourSuperSecretKey'
WAGTAIL_AIRTABLE_ENABLED = True
AIRTABLE_IMPORT_SETTINGS = {
    'appname.ModelName': {
        'AIRTABLE_BASE_KEY': 'app3ds912jFam032S',
        'AIRTABLE_TABLE_NAME': 'Your Airtable Table Name',
        'AIRTABLE_UNIQUE_IDENTIFIER': 'slug', # Must match the Airtable Column name
        'AIRTABLE_SERIALIZER': 'path.to.your.model.serializer.CustomModelSerializer'
    },
    'appname.OtherModelName': {
        'AIRTABLE_BASE_KEY': 'app4ds902jFam035S',
        'AIRTABLE_TABLE_NAME': 'Your Airtable Table Name',
        'AIRTABLE_UNIQUE_IDENTIFIER':
            'Page Slug': 'slug', # 'Page Slug' column name in Airtable, 'slug' field name in Wagtail.
        },
        'AIRTABLE_SERIALIZER': 'path.to.your.model.serializer.OtherCustomModelSerializer'
    },
    'pages.HomePage': {
        'AIRTABLE_BASE_KEY': 'app2ds123jP23035Z',
        'AIRTABLE_TABLE_NAME': 'Wagtail Page Tracking Table',
        'AIRTABLE_UNIQUE_IDENTIFIER':
            'Wagtail Page ID': 'pk',
        },
        'AIRTABLE_SERIALIZER': 'path.to.your.pages.serializer.PageSerializer',
        # Below is an OPTIONAL setting.
        # You can specify models that should be treated the same as this one.
        # In here we're saying pages.BlogPage and pages.ContactPage should
        # be treated the same as pages.HomePage
        'EXTRA_SUPPORTED_MODELS': ['pages.BlogPage', 'pages.ContactPage'],
        # Below is an OPTIONAL setting.
        # By disabling `AIRTABLE_IMPORT_ALLOWED` you can prevent Airtable imports
        # Use cases may be:
        #   - disabling page imports since they are difficult to setup and maintain,
        #   - one-way sync to Airtable only (ie. when a model/Page is saved)
        # Default is True
        'AIRTABLE_IMPORT_ALLOWED': False,
    },
    # ...
}
```

In most cases using the `EXTRA_SUPPORTED_MODELS` setting might be overkill unless you have like 20+ similar models and don't want to flood your config with one-setting-per-model.

However, the most common approach will likely be to support a handful of models, in which case using the below example would be faster and clearner.

```python
AIRTABLE_API_KEY = 'yourSuperSecretKey'
WAGTAIL_AIRTABLE_ENABLED = True
CUSTOM_PAGE_SETTINGS = {
    'AIRTABLE_BASE_KEY': 'app3ds912jFam032S',
    'AIRTABLE_TABLE_NAME': 'Your Airtable Table Name',
    'AIRTABLE_UNIQUE_IDENTIFIER': 'slug', # Must match the Airtable Column name
    'AIRTABLE_SERIALIZER': 'path.to.your.model.serializer.CustomModelSerializer'
},
AIRTABLE_IMPORT_SETTINGS = {
    'home.HomePage': CUSTOM_PAGE_SETTINGS,
    'blog.BlogPage': CUSTOM_PAGE_SETTINGS,
    'appname.YourModel': CUSTOM_PAGE_SETTINGS,
}
```

### Extra Supported Models

You might have a scenario where you want to push Wagtail Page data to a centralized Airtable base. Instead of specifying a new `AIRTABLE_IMPORT_SETTING` dictionary for _every_ page type, even though the import/export settings are going to be the exact same, you can instead specify the `EXTRA_SUPPORTED_MODELS` key with a `list()` of `appname.ModelName` items.

Example: You have HomePage, BlogDetailPage, and MiscPages in your Wagtail app. You can't tell Wagtail-Airtable to use `wagtailcore.Page` because we can't add import/export fields to that model. However, we can add the mapping to a single Wagtail Page, say the HomePage, and then tell Wagtail-Airtable to treat BlogDetailPage and MiscPage the same as HomePage.

> **Note**: You will still need to add the `AirtableMixin` to each of your `Page` Models. See the [examples](examples/) for more details.

### Management Commands

```bash
python manage.py import_airtable appname.ModelName secondapp.SecondModel
```

Optionally you can turn up the verbosity for better debugging with the `--verbosity=2` flag.

##### import_airtable command
This command will look for any `appname.ModelName`s you provide it and use the mapping settings to find data in the Airtable. See the "Behind the scenes" section for more details on how importing works.

### Local Testing Advice

> **Note:** Be careful not to use the production settings as you could overwrite Wagtail or Airtable data.

Because Airtable doesn't provide a testing environment, you'll need to test against a live table. The best way to do this is to copy your live table to a new table (renaming it will help avoid naming confusion), and update your local settings. With this method, you can test to everything safely against a throw-away Airtable. Should something become broken beyond repair, delete the testing table and re-copy the original one.

### Local debugging
Due to the complexity and fragility of connecting Wagtail and Airtable (because an Airtable column can be almost any value) you may need some help debugging your setup. To turn on higher verbosity output, you can enable the Aritable debug setting `WAGTAIL_AIRTABLE_DEBUG = True`. All this does is increase the default verbosity when running the management command. In a standard Django management command you could run `python manage.py import_airtable appname.ModelName --verbosty=2` however when you import from Airtable using the Wagtail admin import page you won't have access to this verbosity argument. But enabling `WAGTAIL_AIRTABLE_DEBUG` you can manually increase the verbosity.

> **Note**: This only only work while `DEBUG = True` in your settings as to not accidentally flood your production logs.

### Airtable Best Practice
Airtable columns can be one of numerous "types", very much like a Python data type or Django field. You can have email columns, url columns, single line of text, checkbox, etc.

To help maintain proper data synchronisation between your Django/Wagtail instance and your Airtable Base's, you _should_ set the column types to be as similar to your Django fields as possible.

For example, if you have a BooleanField in a Django model (or Wagtail Page) and you want to support pushing that data to Airtable amd support importing that same data from Airtable, you should set the column type in Airtable to be a Checkbox (because it can only be on/off, much like how a BooleanField can only be True/False).

In other cases such as Airtables Phone Number column type: if you are using a 3rd party package to handle phone numbers and phone number validation, you'll want to write a custom serializer to handle the incoming value from Airtable (when you import from Airtable). The data will likely come through to Wagtail as a string and you'll want to adjust the string value to be a proper phone number format for internal Wagtail/Django storage. (You may also need to convert the phone number to a standard string when exporting to Airtable as well)

### Running Tests
Clone the project and cd into the `wagtail-airtable/tests/` directory. Then run `python runtests.py tests`. This project is using standard Django unit tests.

To target a specific test you can run `python runtests.py tests.test_file.TheTestClass.test_specific_model`

Commit message:

Removed EXTRA_SUPPORTED_MODELS in favour of re-using dictionaries

README.md, after:

# Wagtail/Airtable

An extension for Wagtail allowing content to be transferred between Airtable sheets and your Wagtail/Django models.

Developed by [Torchbox](https://torchbox.com/) and sponsored by [The Motley Fool](https://www.fool.com/).

![Wagtail Airtable demo](examples/preview.gif)

### How it works

When you setup a model to "map" to an Airtable sheet, every time you save the model it will attempt to update the row in Airtable. If a row is not found, it will create a new row in your Airtable.

When you want to sync your Airtable data to your Wagtail website, you can go to `Settings -> Airtable Import`. You can then import entire tables into your Wagtail instance with the click of a button. If you see "_{Your Model}_ is not setup with the correct Airtable settings" you will need to double check your settings. By default the import page can be found at http://yourwebsite.com/admin/airtable-import/, or if you use a custom /admin/ url it'll be http://yourwebsite.com/{custom_admin_url}/airtable-import/.

##### Behind the scenes...
This package will attempt to match a model object against row in Airtable using a `record_id`. If a model does not have a record_id value, it will look for a match using the `AIRTABLE_UNIQUE_IDENTIFIER` to try and match a unique value in the Airtable to the unique value in your model. Should that succeed your model object will be "paired" with the row in Airtable. But should the record-search fail, a new row in Airtable will be created when you save your model, or a new model object will attempt to be created when you import a model from Airtable.

> **Note**: Object creation _can_ fail when importing from Airtable. This is expected behaviour as an Airtable might not have all the data a model requires. For instance, a Wagtail Page uses django-treebeard, with path as a required field. If the page model import settings do not include the path field, or a path column isn't present in Airtable, the page cannot be created. This same rule applies to other required fields on any Django model including other required fields on a Wagtail Page.

### Installation & Configuration

* Install the package with `pip install wagtail-airtable`
* Add `'wagtail_airtable'` to your project's `INSTALLED_APPS`
* In your settings you will need to map models to Airtable settings. Every model you want to map to an Airtable sheet will need:
    * An `AIRTABLE_BASE_KEY`. You can find the base key in your Airtable docs when you're signed in to Airtable.com
    * An `AIRTABLE_TABLE_NAME` to determine which table to connect to.
    * An `AIRTABLE_UNIQUE_IDENTIFIER`. This can either be a string or a dictionary mapping the Airtable column name to your unique field in your model.
        * ie. `AIRTABLE_UNIQUE_IDENTIFIER: 'slug',` this will match the `slug` field on your model with the `slug` column name in Airtable. Use this option if your model field and your Airtable column name are identical.
        * ie. `AIRTABLE_UNIQUE_IDENTIFIER: {'Airtable Column Name': 'model_field_name'},` this will map the `Airtable Column Name` to a model field called `model_field_name`. Use this option if your Airtable column name and your model field name are different.
    * An `AIRTABLE_SERIALIZER` that takes a string path to your serializer. This helps map incoming data from Airtable to your model fields. Django Rest Framework is required for this. See the [examples/](examples/) directory for serializer examples.

* Lastly make sure you enable wagtail-airtable with `WAGTAIL_AIRTABLE_ENABLED = True`. By default this is disabled so data in your Wagtail site and your Airtable sheets aren't accidentally overwritten. Data is hard to recover, this option helps prevent accidental data loss.

### Example Base Configuration

Below is a base configuration or `ModelName` and `OtherModelName` (both are registered Wagtail snippets), along with `HomePage`.

```python
# your settings.py
AIRTABLE_API_KEY = 'yourSuperSecretKey'
WAGTAIL_AIRTABLE_ENABLED = True
AIRTABLE_IMPORT_SETTINGS = {
    'appname.ModelName': {
        'AIRTABLE_BASE_KEY': 'app3ds912jFam032S',
        'AIRTABLE_TABLE_NAME': 'Your Airtable Table Name',
        'AIRTABLE_UNIQUE_IDENTIFIER': 'slug', # Must match the Airtable Column name
        'AIRTABLE_SERIALIZER': 'path.to.your.model.serializer.CustomModelSerializer'
    },
    'appname.OtherModelName': {
        'AIRTABLE_BASE_KEY': 'app4ds902jFam035S',
        'AIRTABLE_TABLE_NAME': 'Your Airtable Table Name',
        'AIRTABLE_UNIQUE_IDENTIFIER':
            'Page Slug': 'slug', # 'Page Slug' column name in Airtable, 'slug' field name in Wagtail.
        },
        'AIRTABLE_SERIALIZER': 'path.to.your.model.serializer.OtherCustomModelSerializer'
    },
    'pages.HomePage': {
        'AIRTABLE_BASE_KEY': 'app2ds123jP23035Z',
        'AIRTABLE_TABLE_NAME': 'Wagtail Page Tracking Table',
        'AIRTABLE_UNIQUE_IDENTIFIER':
            'Wagtail Page ID': 'pk',
        },
        'AIRTABLE_SERIALIZER': 'path.to.your.pages.serializer.PageSerializer',
        # Below is an OPTIONAL setting.
        # By disabling `AIRTABLE_IMPORT_ALLOWED` you can prevent Airtable imports
        # Use cases may be:
        #   - disabling page imports since they are difficult to setup and maintain,
        #   - one-way sync to Airtable only (ie. when a model/Page is saved)
        # Default is True
        'AIRTABLE_IMPORT_ALLOWED': False,
    },
    # ...
}
```

##### Have multiple models with the same Airtable settings?
The most common approach will likely be to support a handful of models, in which case using the below example would be faster and cleaner. Write a config dictionary once to prevent config bloat.

```python
AIRTABLE_API_KEY = 'yourSuperSecretKey'
WAGTAIL_AIRTABLE_ENABLED = True
CUSTOM_PAGE_SETTINGS = {
    'AIRTABLE_BASE_KEY': 'app3ds912jFam032S',
    'AIRTABLE_TABLE_NAME': 'Your Airtable Table Name',
    'AIRTABLE_UNIQUE_IDENTIFIER': 'slug', # Must match the Airtable Column name
    'AIRTABLE_SERIALIZER': 'path.to.your.model.serializer.CustomModelSerializer'
},
AIRTABLE_IMPORT_SETTINGS = {
    'home.HomePage': CUSTOM_PAGE_SETTINGS,
    'blog.BlogPage': CUSTOM_PAGE_SETTINGS,
    'appname.YourModel': CUSTOM_PAGE_SETTINGS,
}
```

### Management Commands

```bash
python manage.py import_airtable appname.ModelName secondapp.SecondModel
```

Optionally you can turn up the verbosity for better debugging with the `--verbosity=2` flag.

##### import_airtable command
This command will look for any `appname.ModelName`s you provide it and use the mapping settings to find data in the Airtable. See the "Behind the scenes" section for more details on how importing works.

### Local Testing Advice

> **Note:** Be careful not to use the production settings as you could overwrite Wagtail or Airtable data.

Because Airtable doesn't provide a testing environment, you'll need to test against a live table. The best way to do this is to copy your live table to a new table (renaming it will help avoid naming confusion), and update your local settings. With this method, you can test to everything safely against a throw-away Airtable. Should something become broken beyond repair, delete the testing table and re-copy the original one.

### Local debugging
Due to the complexity and fragility of connecting Wagtail and Airtable (because an Airtable column can be almost any value) you may need some help debugging your setup. To turn on higher verbosity output, you can enable the Aritable debug setting `WAGTAIL_AIRTABLE_DEBUG = True`. All this does is increase the default verbosity when running the management command. In a standard Django management command you could run `python manage.py import_airtable appname.ModelName --verbosty=2` however when you import from Airtable using the Wagtail admin import page you won't have access to this verbosity argument. But enabling `WAGTAIL_AIRTABLE_DEBUG` you can manually increase the verbosity.

> **Note**: This only only work while `DEBUG = True` in your settings as to not accidentally flood your production logs.

### Airtable Best Practice
Airtable columns can be one of numerous "types", very much like a Python data type or Django field. You can have email columns, url columns, single line of text, checkbox, etc.

To help maintain proper data synchronisation between your Django/Wagtail instance and your Airtable Base's, you _should_ set the column types to be as similar to your Django fields as possible.

For example, if you have a BooleanField in a Django model (or Wagtail Page) and you want to support pushing that data to Airtable amd support importing that same data from Airtable, you should set the column type in Airtable to be a Checkbox (because it can only be on/off, much like how a BooleanField can only be True/False).

In other cases such as Airtables Phone Number column type: if you are using a 3rd party package to handle phone numbers and phone number validation, you'll want to write a custom serializer to handle the incoming value from Airtable (when you import from Airtable). The data will likely come through to Wagtail as a string and you'll want to adjust the string value to be a proper phone number format for internal Wagtail/Django storage. (You may also need to convert the phone number to a standard string when exporting to Airtable as well)

### Running Tests
Clone the project and cd into the `wagtail-airtable/tests/` directory. Then run `python runtests.py tests`. This project is using standard Django unit tests.

To target a specific test you can run `python runtests.py tests.test_file.TheTestClass.test_specific_model`
